[DOC] Add delete workspace section. (#12917)
Scille/parsec-cloud: docs/hosting/administration/delete-workspace.rst

.. Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS

.. _doc_hosting_administration_workspace_deletion:

==================
Workspace deletion
==================

Workspace deletion is a complex operation that requires access to the to-be-deleted workspace in Parsec,
to the Parsec server and to the object storage. First the workspace's deletion is planned, then, when the delay has elapsed,

> Workspace deletion is a multi-step operation:

Reviewer: As stated in a [previous comment](https://github.com/Scille/parsec-cloud/pull/12917#discussion_r3396418304):

> Even though workspace deletion is a complex, multi-step, I'm not sure is the right introduction because this section should be intended to server administrators (not end-users).

```suggestion
Workspace deletion is a complex operation that requires access to the Parsec server 
and to the object storage. 

The steps to delete a workspace can be summarized as follows:
```

> #. A User deletes a workspace (see the :ref::`userguide _userguide_delete_workspace` or the :ref::`cli guide cli_delete_workspace`)

Reviewer: broken syntax for both references

#. The workspace is marked as scheduled for deletion in the Server (the delay depends on the Organization configuration)
#. When the deletion date has passed, the effective removal can be triggered in the Parsec Server.
#. The corresponding blocks can be deleted from the object storage.

This section describes steps 3 and 4 in order to free up space occupied by workspaces that have been deleted by users.

> #. List the technical ID of workspaces (realms) to be deleted.

Reviewer: I would add a subsection to distinguish these steps (below) from the introduction (above).

```suggestion
Delete a workspace
==================

#. List the technical ID of workspaces (realms) to be deleted.
```

   .. code-block:: shell

      $ python -m parsec list_deletable_realms --organization $ORGANIZATION_NAME --db $PG_URL
      Found 2 deletion candidate(s):
      Realm b65752f922e4413eb61b87dacbd3f804  kind=deletion_planned  deletion_date=2026-06-09T13:06:02.295211Z
      Realm d78799261b744bc89bae9e52234e6bf3  kind=orphaned          orphaned_since=2026-06-09T13:54:21.458044Z

   If the delay has not elapsed, the workspace will not appear here.

   .. note::

      The workspace name does not appear here, as this is considered a sensitive information:
      only the workspace users can know their name.

   .. note::

      A workspace is *orphaned* when no one has access to it. This can happen when all the users with access to it have been revoked. Unless the organization has a :ref:`Sequester <doc_hosting_sequester>`, no one will be able to recover the data, so it can be deleted.

> #. Delete the to-be-deleted workspace.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
#. Delete the workspace from the PostgreSQL database
```

.. Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS

.. _doc_hosting_administration_workspace_deletion:

> 

Reviewer 2: **chore:** spacing

==================
Workspace deletion
==================

Workspace deletion is a complex operation that requires access to the to-be-deleted workspace in Parsec,
to the Parsec server and to the object storage. First the workspace's deletion is planned, then, when the delay has elapsed,
Workspace deletion is a multi-step operation:

#. A User deletes a workspace (see the :ref::`userguide _userguide_delete_workspace` or the :ref::`cli guide cli_delete_workspace`)
#. The workspace is marked as scheduled for deletion in the Server (the delay depends on the Organization configuration)
#. When the deletion date has passed, the effective removal can be triggered in the Parsec Server.
#. The corresponding blocks can be deleted from the object storage.

This section describes steps 3 and 4 in order to free up space occupied by workspaces that have been deleted by users.

> 

Reviewer 2: **chore:** spacing

.. Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS

.. _doc_hosting_administration_workspace_deletion:

==================
Workspace deletion
==================

> 

Author: Introduction?

Prerequisites
=============

- Owner of the the to-be-deleted certificate
- server access

#. Mark the workspace for deletion:

    This step must be done by someone who has ownership of the to-be-deleted workspace.

    Using the CLI:

    .. code-block:: shell

        parsec-cli workspace archive --device $DEVICE --workspace $WORKSPACE_NAME \
        --deletion-planned-in-seconds 2592000

    Or the GUI
        - click on the delete workspace button.
        - follow the instructions.

> 

Author: TODO screenshots ?

    .. note::

        You can customize the delay only using the CLI, but it can not be less than the organization configured delay (see the ``realm_minimum_archiving_period_before_deletion`` option in :ref:`Create Organization <doc_hosting_administration_create_organization_create>`).

    This operation makes the workspace read only, and when the delay will elapse, it will be inaccessible from the GUI.
    But the files will still exist in storage.

#. Wait for the delay to pass. The next steps will need to be executed by a server admin.

#. Find the technical id for the to-be-deleted workspace.

    .. code-block:: shell

        $ python -m parsec list_deletable_realms --organization $ORGANIZATION_NAME --db $PG_URL
        Found 2 deletion candidate(s):
        Realm b65752f922e4413eb61b87dacbd3f804  kind=deletion_planned  deletion_date=2026-06-09T13:06:02.295211Z
        Realm d78799261b744bc89bae9e52234e6bf3  kind=orphaned          orphaned_since=2026-06-09T13:54:21.458044Z

    If the delay has not elapsed, the workspace will not appear here.

    .. note::

        The workspace name does not appear here, as the server admin is not a Parsec user.

    .. note::

>         A workspace is *orphaned* when no one has access to it. Unless the organization has a :ref:`Sequester <doc_hosting_sequester>`, no one will be able to recover the data, so it can be deleted.

Author: ```suggestion
        A workspace is *orphaned* when no one has access to it. This can happen when all the users with access to it have been revoked. Unless the organization has a :ref:`Sequester <doc_hosting_sequester>`, no one will be able to recover the data, so it can be deleted.
```

.. Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS

.. _doc_hosting_administration_workspace_deletion:

==================
Workspace deletion
==================

Workspace deletion is a complex operation that requires access to the to-be-deleted workspace in Parsec,
to the Parsec server and to the object storage. First the workspace's deletion is planned, then, when the delay has elapsed,

> the removal from the Parsec server can be triggered, and finally the blocks can be deleted from the object storage.

Reviewer: Even though workspace deletion is a complex, multi-step, I'm not sure is the right introduction because this section should be intended to server administrators (not end-users).

```suggestion
Workspace deletion is a multi-step operation:

#. A User deletes a workspace
#. The workspace is marked as scheduled for deletion in the Server (the delay depends on the Organization configuration)
#. When the deletion date has passed, the effective removal can be triggered in the Parsec Server.
#. The corresponding blocks can be deleted from the object storage.

This section describes steps 3 and 4 in order to free up space occupied by workspaces that have been deleted by users.
```

Reviewer: The first part of this comment was not adressed, I will add it to a new review

Reviewer: Done: https://github.com/Scille/parsec-cloud/pull/12917#discussion_r3420073652

> #. Mark the workspace for deletion:

Reviewer: This whole step is somehow redundant with what's already documented [here](https://docs.parsec.cloud/en/latest/userguide/parsec-workspaces.html#delete-a-workspace). IMO there's high probability of forgetting updating both sections in case of changes.

I would remove it and keep this file about server administrators. If there is any relevant information that is not already mention in the user guide, you can move it there.
What do you think?

Author: I added cross references in the userguide and the cli guide.

    This step must be done by someone who has ownership of the to-be-deleted workspace.

    Using the CLI:

    .. code-block:: shell

        parsec-cli workspace archive --device $DEVICE --workspace $WORKSPACE_NAME \
        --deletion-planned-in-seconds 2592000

    Or the GUI

        .. figure:: ../figures/delete_workspace_context_menu_en.png
            :align: center
            :alt: Workspace contextual menu

        - click on the delete workspace button.
        - follow the instructions. You will be asked to type the workspace's name to confirm.

    .. note::

        You can customize the delay only using the CLI, but it can not be less than the organization configured delay (see the ``realm_minimum_archiving_period_before_deletion`` option in :ref:`Create Organization <doc_hosting_administration_create_organization_create>`).

    This operation makes the workspace read only, and when the delay will elapse, it will be inaccessible from the GUI.
    But the files will still exist in storage.

> #. Wait for the delay to pass. The next steps will need to be executed by a server admin.

Reviewer: As with the first step, there is nothing the server admin needs to do here.

In the typical case, the server admin will just trigger deletion regularly, regardless if there are workspaces to be removed or not.

```suggestion
```

> #. Find the technical id for the to-be-deleted workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. List the technical ID of workspaces (realms) to be deleted.
```

>     .. code-block:: shell

Reviewer: Restructured text is quite petty with indentation: it should align exactly with the first letter of the outer list. So here it shouldn't be 2 spaces, nor 4, but 3 ^^. 

That also applies for subsequent indentations.

        $ python -m parsec list_deletable_realms --organization $ORGANIZATION_NAME --db $PG_URL
        Found 2 deletion candidate(s):
        Realm b65752f922e4413eb61b87dacbd3f804  kind=deletion_planned  deletion_date=2026-06-09T13:06:02.295211Z
        Realm d78799261b744bc89bae9e52234e6bf3  kind=orphaned          orphaned_since=2026-06-09T13:54:21.458044Z

    If the delay has not elapsed, the workspace will not appear here.

    .. note::

>         The workspace name does not appear here, as the server admin is not a Parsec user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The workspace name does not appear here, as this is considered a sensitive information: 
        only the workspace users can know their name.
```

    .. note::

        A workspace is *orphaned* when no one has access to it.  This can happen when all the users with access to it have been revoked. Unless the organization has a :ref:`Sequester <doc_hosting_sequester>`, no one will be able to recover the data, so it can be deleted.

#. Delete the to-be-deleted workspace.

>     .. code-block:::: shell

Reviewer: This does not appear in the docs due to wrong indentation (4 spaces is considered a _comment_ in RST). It should be aligned with 3 spaces. 

<img width="783" height="302" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9fbc3d8b-b3cb-4fb3-bd04-d8e27f1df8da" />

Author: And there was 4 : instead of 2 and if I let that be shell instead of console if trigger's a warning because of the ' in "all the realm's block"

        $ python -m parsec delete_realm --organization $ORGANIZATION_NAME --db $PG_URL --realm 7208844033874dfb9bb49da961d3f65a --dump-realm-blocks paths-to-delete.txt
        Exporting a list of all the realm's block that can be removed  [####################################]  1/1
        Exported 1 block slug(s) to paths-to-delete.txt
        Deleting metadata for realm 7208844033874dfb9bb49da961d3f65a... ✔
        ⚠️ The realm has been deleted, however its blocks are still present in the object storage
        ⚠️ You should now manually clean the object storage by removing all the path listed in paths-to-delete.txt

>     This command does two things:

Reviewer: Wrong alignment

    - export the paths to the blocks as they are referenced in the object storage
    - delete the workspace from the postgresql database

    This command does *not* remove the blocks from your object storage.

> #. Purge the object storage from useless objects listed in the output file.

Reviewer: Maybe obvious but I would mention that the output file refers to the previous command.

```suggestion
#. Purge the object storage from useless objects listed in the output file of the previous command (e.g. ``paths-to-delete.txt``).
```
